Projeto 01

1 – Introduction and What is Communism?

What consists of today's live?
The live today will be a summary of basic principles of communism,
that is, if you are coming into contact with communism for the first time,
maybe this video would be a good way to start.
And my objective here is show the common basis of communism.
And why do i say 'common basis'?
Because exist different thinklines of communism.
But i'll show the common basis of all these lines.
Except some weird sects there.
Here will be see the really basic of basics.
In the end of this live, i'll show a reading guide,
making avaliable all the books for free save one,
later we'll talk about that one,
and sugesting a reading order, right?
I strongly recommend that you read, don't use the video as a reference.
It's really worth it read and reread even if you already master the topic for you lay into your head.
It's also worth it to search for additional bibliography because what will show here its basic a lot, right?
Really, really basic.
So, let's go: basic principles of communism.
On here, i already want to thank Groselha Atômica.
@panquetriste who make this wonderful art what's there in screen.
I'd want to thank too Thales Caramante and João Carvalho
who helped me with the script of this live.
And i make a wish for you are a marxologist who has a phd in marxism.
Please, understand that i'm talking in a basic, simplified way, right?
Don't need to quote Grundrisse,
the letters who Marx send for i don't know who, don't need, ok?
We know you know a lot of Marx.
And fine, other day we talk about that, right?
So, let's go: What's communism?
Anticlickbait, definition in the screen:
The communism is the doctrine of the conditions of the liberation of the proletariat.
This is an Engels' quote,
in the book called “The Principles of Communism”.
So, first of all, don't be scared with the word 'doctrine'.
Doctrine means a set of principles.
Isn't like indoctrination, don't conflate 'doctrine' with 'tenet'.
Today there is a lot of talk about indoctrination,
and the people think this is permanently negative, right?
So, communism is the doctrine of the conditions of the liberation of the proletariat.
 
In case someone don't know, what's proletariat?
Proletarian is who lives from the sale of its labor power, who works in exchange for a wage.
 This is the proletarian.
Moreover, what is the goal of communism?
The communism crave a society without social classes, that is, a society without exploration of the human by other human.
And a society without classes can only exist through a society without private property of the forces of the production.
And, in the end, without state.
Is a society free of exploration without social classes, without forces of production and without state.
That's it. This is the communism.
The communism has happen in the history?
No, the Soviet Union was not a communist country, Cuba is not a communist country, the China is not a communist country.
Have classes? Is no communism. Have state? Is no communism.
So the communism is we want to get to.
We'll talk about what Soviet Union, Cuba, China and etc. be or were.
So, let's go.
Who delineate for the first time those set of principles?
Who describes? Who theorized those set of principles?
And now we have to talk about him, right?
Karl Marx. Marx is the theorical most important of all the set of communist principles.
Marx is absolutely unavoidable.
Is impossible be communist without read Marx. Impossible.
First of all: marxism and communism are the same thing?
No, marxism and communism not are the same thing,
but them are deeply conected.
The difference between marxism and communism will be a bit more clear along of our exhibition, but remember they are not exactly synonyms, right?
And what the marxism consists? What is marxism?
Marxism contains three constitutive parts: A philosophical,
a economic and a political part.
The philosophical part consists in the dialetical and historical materialism,
the economic part, in the criticism of the political economy,
and the political part, of the scientific socialism.
These parts are not isolated from each other, right?
They are not isolated. They are mix themselves, they interact.
In these three parts, are the common basis of anyone communist.
My goal here is not tell
the live story of Marx, Engels and Lenin, right?
I'll tell just a little of Marx's story to be
a bit more clear what i'm wanting to say.
So, in 1818, Marx born in a town called Trier, which is in Prussia, where today is Germany.
In the 1840's, he start to write for a Prussian newspaper
and he was banned from Prussia because he was
very critical of monarquists politics.
Of Prussian monarquist politics.
In 1844, he goes to France, exiled,
and he meets a guy called Friederich Engels.
The most longer mustache guy i've seen in my life.
Engels was son of a industrial burgeois
and would become Marx's friend, intelectual partner and maecenas.
And to who don't know, maecenas is who fund some project.
So, yes, Engels was a burgeois' son, but Marx wasn't.
Marx was studied Philosophy University of Berlim
and there he was of a group called Young Hegelians.
Here has a illustration of the young hegelians.
As the name says, Marx studing philosophy in University of Berlin,
he has very influenced by ruling philosophy in Germany at this time which as the Hegel's philosophy.
And there, in the 1840's, Marx and Engels start to elaborate
a critique of the young hegelians.
They start to diverge of the young hegelians
and of own Hegel.
This critique that Marx and Engels do to Hegel and the young hegelians
will consists in the philosophical pillar of the marxism.
And there i want to do a addendum, right? I want to beg leave.
Maybe, in this live, maybe i'll start with the hardest.
There's who says that the philosophical pillar of marxism is the hardest.
But why i choose start talk about it first if it is the hardest? Because Marx formulated the other pillars from the philosophy.
The philosophical pillar was the first to be formulated.
And this pillar give us the marxist method.
So, if you are having a hard time understanding,
know that isn't amazing. it is something that is quite usual.
I took too long to understand this philosophical pillar.
Demanded a lot of reading.
What i ask is that you give me a chance to try
at least get familiar with this vocabulary.
In the end, as i said, i'll give some extra reading to try
to improve this process a littlle.
So, let's go. Returning to the beginning of our explication.
You're know that communism is
the set of principles of the labor class libertation.
In other words to be more clear.
The final goal is the end of classes,
the private property of the forces of production and the state.
And there must already be popping up in the minds of some people who hear
talk about it for the first time:
But isn't that utopian? Is this not idealism?
Do you ever heard that communism is utopian? What is a utopia?
The communists are idealists?


02 - Dialectical and Historical Materialism


Well, little do people that never got into contact with communism know
but communism appears as a critique of utopianism
and a critique of idealism.
Marxism's philosophical pillar is constituted
as a critique of utopianisms and idealisms
And that's what we're going to talk about now.
We'll talk about dialectical and historical materialism
and the name already sounds scary, right? A philosophical curse word,
and that's why I said that I might have chosen to start by the most complicated part, but I beg you give it a chance.
Right then, Remember Marx was a Young Hegelian?
Well, even though he was a harsh critic of Hegel's philosophy,
Marx was heavily influenced by Hegel.
But influenced in what way?
Mainly regarding a thing called dialectics.
So, dialectical and historical materialism, we'll begin
by talking a bit about dialectics.
So what is dialectics?
That's something we'd need ten tomes to answer,
but I'll try and summarize.
First of all, Hegelian dialectics was opposed to another philosophical method called metaphysics, which was the dominant philosophical method up to Hegel.  
In order for us to understand dialectics
it's worth it to understand what metaphysics is
because one thing makes the other clearer.  
That's the part of the stream where I'll cite the most, ok?
I'll avoid reading too many quotations
but I think these ones are helpful
because this part is quite difficult.  
Right then, We've said that dialectics opposes metaphysics.
Engels: "To the metaphysician, things and their mental reflexes, ideas, are isolated, are to be considered one after the other and apart from each other, are objects of investigation fixed, rigid, given once for all. He thinks in absolutely irreconcilable antitheses. His communication is 'yea, yea; nay, nay'; for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil. For him, a thing either exists or does not exist; a thing cannot at the same time be itself and something else. Positive and negative absolutely exclude one another".
That's metaphysics then.
In summary: metaphysics is a method that works with isolated,
fixed categories.
Dialectics, on the other hand, another quote from Engels:
"...comprehends things and their representations, ideas, in their essential connection, concatenation, motion, origin and ending. Such processes as those mentioned above are, therefore, so many corroborations of its own method of procedure".
That's referring to passages of this book I'm quoting, "Socialism: Utopian and Scientific" by Engels.
Dialectics is the philosophy that works with constantly moving categories that relate to each other by means of contradictions, of contraries.
So, a famous example Hegel gives,
the master-slave dialectic.  
In summary, the master can exist only if there is a slave.
Master and slave aren't fixed, isolated, unchanging categories.
The category of master only exists through the existence of the slave category. Within the contradictions between master and slave.
These categories change throughout History
but I wont get too much into the master-slave dialectic.  
I'm just showing you how the categories that dialectics works
are interconnected and ever changing. That's it then.
So, according to Engels, and I think that's a good analogy.
Metaphysics cannot see the woods for the trees.
For him and for Marx
dialectics was much more adequate for understanding
not only natural sciences' phenomena, but also society's.  
An example of dialectics Engels gives in this book I quoted
is Darwin's theory of evolution.
Darwin's theory of evolution was a huge blow to metaphysics
because it works with transformation,
with historical change, on the very long term.  
It made it impossible to work with fixed categories,
categories are now changing.  
They transform, they emerge and come to pass
as History goes on.  
That's the dialectical principle of Marx's philosophy
which is influenced by Hegel.  
Let's go to the other part then, it was dialectical and historical materialism
Let's talk materialism. Materialism.
I want you to do a mental exercise now.
Look around you, wherever you are. Look around.
Look at everything that surrounds you.
Look if there's a table nearby, a computer, a cellphone,
a chair, anything.  
I want you to think about this:
who made these things? Who manufactured them?
If there's a chair where you are, who manufactured it?
If there's a couch, who made that couch?
And further, who transported it there?
If the couch has metal parts, who mined the metals?
Whose hands extracted them from the veins of the earth?
Now I want you to reflect
on how little we think about that.  
How little we think about who made the objects that surround us.
And no, it wasn't machines, it wasn't just machines.
We are surrounded by an immense amount of human labor.
But we don't realize it.
We're disconnected from the human labor that surrounds us.
What is historical materialism, especially the materialism part? Materialism is the understanding that material production
is the basis for our social structure.  
Not only do we have to think about who made what is around us  
but what surrounds us is
the basis upon which we organize society.  
The two things are connected.
That's materialism's great trump card.
Let's go back to Hegel for a bit.
Marx incorporated Hegel's dialectics.
But materialism arises from a critique of Hegel.
A critique of what exactly? Hegel was an idealist.
Remember I said Marxism came around as a critique to idealism?  
And this critique of idealism is
mainly a critique of Hegel's philosophy.  
So Marx takes Hegelian dialectics but  leaves out the idealism.
Let's use a quotation from Marx himself then:
My dialectic method is not
only different from the Hegelian, but is its direct opposite.
To Hegel, the life-process of the human brain, i.e., the process of thinking,
which, under the name of “the Idea,” he even transforms
into an independent subject,
is the demiurgos (for those who don't know, demiurgos means deity) of the real world,  
and the real world is only the external, phenomenal form of “the Idea.”  
With me, on the contrary, the ideal is nothing else than the material world
reflected by the human mind, and translated into forms of thought".  
That's a quotation from Capital.
Don't worry, I know it's complicated but I'll explain.
For Hegel, reality is a manifestation of human ideas,
a manifestation of human thought.  
And human thought in its turn is the manifestation of the original Idea
(with capital "i") that comes from the deity, from God.  
Hegel's philosophy has a theological outlook.
And the Young Hegelians were also idealists.
They believed that what prevented society's development
were the ideas in people's minds.  
There needed to be a revolution in people's thought
and only then from reason and thought, we would transform reality.  
More than that, as capitalism developed
there appeared philosophers that saw what was happening,
the rise of poverty, of misery,
and devised fairer, more egalitarian societies
that would free all of humanity.
Where? In their minds.
According to Engels, the more detailed these societies were, the further they drifted from reality.
These philosophers became known as Utopian socialists.  
For those who don't know, utopia is a 'non--place'
Idealism means you create an idea in your head and try to apply it to reality.
Materialism is the opposite of that.
Marx puts this idea upside-down.
It's not reality that is created by our thoughts.
But rather our ideas are an abstraction of reality.
First we get into contact with reality
and then we formulate ideas, not the contrary.
And there is an inseparable connection between material reality,
the objects that are around us, and how we organize society.
These two things are inseparable.
There's no social organization without a material backing, a material substrate.
There's no use in designing a society in our heads and trying
to apply it to reality while ignoring reality itself.
That's materialism. That's the difference, right?
So what is material reality? To make it clearer,
it's not only nature, but also the way we produce
Remember I told you to look around?
That all produced in order to satisfy our material needs.
We have to sit down, we make a chair.
That's part of material reality as well.
But not only that, our production also satisfies
our cultural and intellectual wants.
Not only eating, clothing, housing but also what we desire
to consume as culture.
This quote is by Marx and Engels
"What they {the individuals} are, therefore, coincides with their production,
both with what they produce and with how they produce.
The nature of individuals thus depends on the material conditions determining their production."
What we are depends on how we produce our existence.
What we are depends on how we eat, where we live,
what we wear, how we wear.
It depends on that, on how we transport ourselves,
how we satisfy our needs.
So the way we produce reality
we call it infrastructure.
Our infrastructure is the production of food, of clothing,
of houses, etc.
A social structure arises over this infrastructure. We call that superstructure.
It's what is above the infrastructure.
What is there in the superstructure? Culture, religion, morals, among other things. That is, our culture, our religion, our morals, are above.
They are built upon a material basis.
That is to say, for example, that our religion has
everything to do with how we produce our material reality,
how we produce our food, our houses, our clothes.
That is all connected and we can never
loose sight of the material basis of reality.
One thing depends on the other.
Is this a mechanical process though?
Does that mean that every time we produce food in the same way
the same religion will emerge?
No, it doesn't mean that the same material basis
will always give rise to the same superstructure,
but that the superstructure is dependent on the material basis. Dependent.
It is not mechanically determined by it, but dependent on it.
This is really important;
once this superstructure has risen,
it impacts back on the material basis.
So our culture, our religion, our morals can
impact on how we produce our reality.
But it doesn't exist without that reality.
That's a dialectical movement.
Remember we said dialectics was important?
In its connections, in its movement, and not in fixed categories.
Infrastructure and superstructure aren't fixed, unchanging categories.
They are connected, they interact with each other and they move.
I know it's complicated, but give it a chance and at least
 get familiarized with this vocabulary: materialism, material basis,
 infrastructure, superstructure, dialectics, etc.
So do you remember what was dialectical and historical materialism?
Where does the historical part come in?
This method is such that Marx and Engels perceive
 History through the ways people produced
 their reality in order to satisfy their needs and how that affected the social structure.
So for Marx and Engels the first historical fact is
 the satisfaction of our needs.
The first time a human built a tool in order to satisfy a need. Thats the first historical fact.
From the moment we satisfy a need on, we create other needs. This is the historical process for creating new needs.
The wheel of History keeps on turning
 as we satisfy our needs.
So Marx and Engels look at History and ask:
how did they produce? From this production, what was the social structure?
How does the social structure of said society relate
 to the way this society produces?
That's historical materialism.
For summarizing, there's a quotation that's a bit long,
 but it ties together everything I've said.  
"The materialist conception of history starts from the proposition that the production of the means to support human life and,
 next to production, the exchange of things produced, is the basis of all social structure;
 that in every society that has appeared in history,
 the manner in which wealth is distributed and
 society divided into classes or orders
 is dependent upon what is produced, how it is produced,
 and how the products are exchanged.  
From this point of view, the final causes of all social changes and political revolutions are to be sought,
 not in men's brains, not in men's better insights into
 eternal truth and justice, but in changes in the modes of production and exchange.
 They are to be sought, not in the philosophy, but in the economics of each particular epoch."
This means that revolutions, including the bourgeois revolutions,
 didn't happen in the way liberals themselves describe it.
The liberals say people started demanding more freedom
and that propelled the revolution forward.
No. Revolutions happen when our way of producing
 and reproducing life changes.
Every revolution has a material basis, a material substrate.
It doesn't appear in someone's mind and is then applied into reality
because that's impossible, that goes against the laws of nature.
And that's what we call idealism.

03 – Critique of Political Economy


Marxism emerges as an opposition in a critique of idealism and utopianism, ok?
So, pay attention in this last Engel's quote here:
"They are to be sought, not in the philosophy, but in the economics"
That's what we are going to talk now: Critique of Economy.
So one thing that I need you to pay attention is this:
Why I first explain through the philosofical pillar?
The philosofical pillar give us the method.
And Marx and Engels analyze everything from now using this method.
Dialectical and historical materialism is always the perspective.
This method is applied to reality to understand the reality.
And now we move on to the Economic Pillar of Marxism.
Remember I said that Marx was exiled in France and he met Engels there? So, Engels reads Marx's texts and he criticizes Marx's texts . He said: “Marx, there is an economic dimension missing from your analyzes”
Then Marx closed inside a library
and he reads the writings of English economists,
especially these two in the screen: Adam Smith and David Ricardo.
And I need to clarify now:
Can you see that I'm using the term "Political Economy"
Back then, "Political Economy" term was dominant
because it was clear that "Economics" and "Politics" were inseparable.
As Burgeous Economy was becoming dominant,
they discard the "political" to give an alleged neutrality for Economics. “No, no. Economics has nothing to do with Politics. Economics is Economics.
Economics is an exact science, we do a study of reality in a neutral way."
And for Marxists, until this day the expression used is "Political Economy", ok? Marxists doesn't disassociate economy from politics. Never.
By the way, I even put here, look.
For those who don't know, Marx's masterpiece “Capital”, “Das Kapital”,
it's written here: “A Critique of Political Economy”,
“Capital". Critique of Political Economy", it's the subtitle.
So the Marxist economy develops out
of a critique of the political economy of bourgeois economists.
And some would say, just to make it clear for you,
some would say there is no Marxist Economics,
that Marxist Economics is a bourgeois economy's critique,
but you'll see controversy about it .
Just to let you know that this exists.
What is the critique of Marx's Political Economy?
It's an analysis of capitalism, basically.
Marx lived at a time when capitalism was already dominant .
But, what is capitalism, folks? What is capitalism?
And I'm telling you, this Critique of Political Economy's excerpt will be where I'll immunize you with a mandatory vocabulary to understand Critique of Political Economy, ok?
Here we are going to make a kind of glossary because it's needed, right? Truly understand; know how to describe what these terms means.
I'm going to talk like that, with just the cam, and we'll recap later.
Anyway, relax.
What is capitalism? Capitalism is a mode of production, mode of production.
What is a "mode of production"? Mode of production is the result of interactions
between productive forces and relations of production.
What are productive forces and relations of production? Productive forces are how humans act on nature.
Relations of production are how humans act on each other.
Therefore, we have an action on nature and an action on each other. The interaction between these actions results in the mode of production, right?
Point number one: What are the capitalist productive forces?
Capitalist productive forces are the employment of industry, machinery,
energy matrices automation, and especially division of labor, division of labor.   
In Capitalism, out work is segmented, it is broken down into specialized small parts.
Therefore, our capitalist productive force isn't just a machine, but it's how we divide up this work.
What are relations of production? We talked about productive forces, now we have relations of production.
Capitalist relations of production are based in the exploitation of Proletarian labour by the Bourgeoisie, ok?
The foundation of the relations of production is the exploitation.
We are going to explain about exploitation further ahead.
First of all, that exploitation is based on a class division.
What is Class? Class, folks, is a social division of labor.
Are there classless societies? Yes. In classless societies
everyone has to work, everyone benefits from the fruits of labor,  
and the labor is divided by ability or skill.
This type of division we call it "Natural Divison".
In class societies, there is no natural division, there is a social division.
And what does it means? Imagine that you work on a factory .
The factory owner isn't less skilled than you to work in the factory.
So, why do you work at the factory and he doesn't?
Since he has the same skills as you.
Because he belongs to another class.
What determines the class is which position you occupy in the producion chain.
And under capitalism, these classes are increasingly reduced to bourgeois,
In other words, the class that doesn't work and owns the means of production,
and proletariat, the class that does work and owns nothing
other than your work force.
What divides these classes is not skill, it is not ability, it is not vocation, it is social.
Well then, another characteristic of relations of production.
We have classes and one of them own the means of production,
that is, these means of production are private private property.
One of the central characteristics of capitalism is the Private Property.
What is Private Property? There is a classical definition
of the bourgeois economists themselves: Private property is
the free disposal of another's labor power.
When we are talking about private property,
we are talking about private property of the means of production.
Why did private property, and only "private property",
became synonymous with private property of the means of production?
Because the private property of the means of production was
the first form of private property.
So, in the time of Marx,of Smith, of Ricardo, talk about private property was talk about private property of the means of production.
Back to definition: Private property is
the free disposal of another's labor power.
I give an example: remember that Mode of Production is
the interaction between productive force and relations of production?
Did we have another Modes of Production? Yes.
We had, for example, the feudal mode of production.
We had, for example, the slave-owning mode of production.
For example, in the slave-owning mode of production.
What is private property in the slave-owning mode of production?
The slave. Remember that private property is
the free disposal of another's labor power?
How does the slave owner disposes of the labor force of others?
Owning the person. Another person's work is
freely available to the slaveholder.
 
The person is the owner's private property.
How this works in capitalism? People are not the property of the capitalist, but the capitalist owns the means of production.
Means of production, that is, what is necessary for the work execution is taken from the hand of workers, and the capitalists controls
the worker's productive forces through wage labor.
Workers are forced to sell their labor power to work on the means of production that have been taken from their hands.
And how this capitalist can take
these means of production out of the worker's hand?
Because he owns something called "Capital".
What is Capital? Capital can be summed up in a simple few sentences
"Capital is value that creates value"; "resources that creates resources";
"wealth that creates wealth"
Capital. Capital is money? No. But capital can be money? Yes.
They aren't synonymous, it's that what I mean..
What you have in your wallet now isn't capital, ok?
Capital is a resource that can be in form of money that is used in the acquisition of means of production .
Factory, machine, land, energy, raw material and workforce.
Once such means are acquired they become part of capital.
So, factory, machine, energy, raw material are part of capital, ok?   That's why capital isn't just money.
Therefore, in short,  capitalist relations of production are based
on class division. One class owns the means of production and doesn't work,
the other only owns its labor labor power and sells its labor power.
What bring us the last characteristic of relations of production:
the Commodification of Social Relations..
In capitalism, the commodity is the center of social relations.
In capitalism we don't produce our existence,
we buy our existence..
You don't produce your food, you buy your food.
You don't sew your clothes, you buy your clothes.
You don't build your house, you buy your house.
And you sell your labor fource too,
your labor force becomes a commodity.
But, what is a commodity?  Commodity is something that is produced
for someone else's comsuption, and to be traded on the market.
This commodity element deserves more attention.
Because, again, as commodity is the center of all
social relations in capitalism, it needs to be undestood.
Before that, let's review everything.
C'mon, vocabulary:
Mode of Production: interaction between productive forces and relations of production.
Capistalism is a Mode of Production.
What are Productive Forces: how humans act on nature.
What are Relations of Production: how humans act on each other.
.
What is Class: social division of labor (as opposed to the work natural division),
position occupied in the productive process.
Is class determined by how much work do you get? No.
If you earn wages, you are a worker, ok?
If you earn wages, you are a proletariat.
"Ah, my salary is 100K/monthly", you are a proletariat.
Class is determined by the social division of labor.
Class is determined by where you are in the productive process.
What makes it so confusing is that, nowadays, we use this terminology "Upper Class", "Middle Class",  "Lower Class".
What determines class for Marxism is
the position you occupy in the productive process, right? So that's right.
Private Property: free disposal of another's labor power.  
Remembering that we are talking about the private property of means of production. It's not your house, your old truck, your flip-flops.
Means of production: what is necessary for the execution of work.
Factory, raw material, energy.
Capital: value that creates value, resource that creates resource, wealth that creates wealth.
Commodity: something produced to be consumed by the other,
to be sold in the market, okay?

4 – (Valor, Mais valia e Socialismo Científico)*


So, let'go to a subject that is a bit more complicated, but fundamental to our understanding of Marx's critique of Political Economy.
Remember that the commodity is the center of our social relations?
This commodity has something called Value.  
So the question that comes up is: what is Value? How is Value determined?
Ok, so I'll begin with a quote that made me understand Value once and for all.
But I'll start with the quote and then we are gonna describe Value, not the contrary.
"...if I say a quarter of wheat exchanges with iron in a certain proportion, or the Value of a quarter  of  wheat  is  expressed  in  a  certain  amount  of  iron, I  say  that  the  Value  of  wheat  and its  equivalent  in  iron  are  equal  to some  third  thing,   which  is  neither  wheat  nor  iron,  because  I suppose them to express the same magnitude in two different shapes.
Either of them, the wheat or the iron, must, therefore, independently of the other, be reducible to this third thing which is their common measure.".
I've never forgotten this quote.
If a certain amount of wheat is equal to certain amount of iron, it does not mean that one is the same as the other, but that they are equal to a third thing.
And this third thing is Value. Ok, so, Value.
Value is maybe one of the most complicated concepts of Political Economy, even Marx recognized that.
Marx says in the Introduction to Capital that the first chapter was the most complicated, and it is the one in which he describes Value.
We have commodities in society, we buy our things.
These commodities have Value.
Do you remember when I told you to look around and think about who made the things you have?
All the objects you possess, all of them, without exception, has one substance in common. Do you know what this substance common to all the things you have is? Labour.
Labour, folks, is a social substance.
Every commodity has in it some amount of crystallized labour.  
Is Value the same thing as price? No, no. Is price Value, chat? No.
Every time you think you're not understanding what Value is, be sure you're not  confusing it with price, ok?
So, what determines the Value of a commodity?  
The labour socially necessary for the confection of this commodity.
Folks, what has more Value, a glass or a car? Car.
Why? Because the amount of labour needed to make a car is way bigger. Making a car requires way more labour than making a glass.
Therefore, a car has much more Value than a glass.
Does this mean that if I had a glass factory, and it took me the same amount of time needed to make a car, to make this glass, the glass would get more expensive? No, ok? No. For the love of God, no.
Value is determined by the amount of socially necessary labour.  
The social criteria is fundamental.  
What determines Value is the amount of labour in a certain social state and under specific productive conditions of an entire society.
It's how much labour an entire society needs to produce a glass, and not how much you, an individual, needs to produce a glass, ok?.
And price? So, if Value is not price, what then is price?
Price is the expression of value as money, expression in money.  
Price usually gravitates around value.
This price that gravitates around Value, Adam Smith - the Adam Smith, not Marx - called it central price.     
Once a commodity is produced by labour and it goes out to be sold in the market. It (the commodity) will get closer to its value.
Value is not price, value is a property of the commodity, and value is determined by the amount of socially necessary labour.
Very well, remember we said that the commodity is the center of all social relations?
In Capitalism, our labour power is also a commodity.
We sell our labour power at market price.  
If our labour power is a commodity, and value is a property of a commodity.
What is the value of our labour power?
The value of our labour power is also determined by the socially necessary labour,
but in another way, the value of your labour power is determined by all that reproduces you.
It's the value of everything you need to exist.  
Food, clothing, roof, heating, etc.
All that you consume in order to exist has in it the socially necessary labour needed to produce it.
The Value of your labour power is the sum of the values of all the things you need in order to exist.  
And, in Capitalism, specially, with an extremely unqualified workforce,  the labour power's value gets really close to the bare minimum you need to maintain your existence. So, when you sell your labour power in the labour market, that's why we call it labour market, you are selling it by your value, and the value of your labour power is determined by what you need to keep existing.  
And this you can derive from reality, folks.
Your salary is being paid to you so that you can buy what you need to continue existing..
Why is all of that so important?
Because understanding what value is makes us comprehend the greatest discovery of Marxist Political Economy, which is the Surplus Value.

Without understanding value, we would not understand surplus.
"Surplus (valia)" can also be "surplus value".
Got it? To understand surplus value, we need to understand value.
So: according to Engels, the discovery of the surplus value is a discovery in the same magnitude as Darwin's Theory of Evolution. Why?
Because it can expose, strip naked, the internal mechanisms of exploitation.
When we talk about exploitation in Capitalism, folks, we are not judging it.
We are describing the mechanism of Capitalism.
Talking about exploitation in Capitalism is not a judgment on moral grounds, it's merely descriptive.
And this is only understood when your understand what value and surplus value are.
So, let's go over it again: what determines the value of a commodity is the socially necessary labour contained in this commodity.
Who does this labour?
It's the worker, not the bourgeois.  The bourgeois doesn't work, who works is the worker.
Very well, after working and creating this value, in exchange, the worker receives a wage.
But the wage of the worker is equal to the value of his labour power, and not the value he created while labouring!
That means that while the worker is working, labouring, he creates value, creates value, creates value, but he receives the equivalent to the value of the labour power in the form of a wage.  
That is, what he creates has no connection with what he receives.
What he receives has a connection with what he needs to live.
Imagine the following: If you have an 8-hour workday
and in four hours you produce the equivalent value of your salary,
the other four hours you worked for free.
This free labour we call it surplus labour .
The value created in this surplus period is appropriated by the bourgeois in the form of the surplus value.
Surplus value is the mechanism by which the bourgeois profits.
And we have three types of surplus value:absolute, relative, extraordinary.
Absolute surplus value expands as the labor hours expand.
Remember what I said? You need 4 daily hours to generate the value of your salary, and your workday has 8 hours.
Out of a sudden, your workday goes up to 10 hours, without a wage increase. You've created more surplus value.
Absolute surplus value: the workday increases, so the capitalist's profit increases.
Relative surplus value: imagine that you work 8 hours a day, but the factory got optimized.
Instead of producing x chairs, you produce, in the same amount of time, 2x chairs.
But you receive the same salary.
You increased the extraction of value in a relative manner; the labour time needed is the same, but you can produce way more.
And the extraordinary surplus value has to do with the production of the same objects, of the same commodities, but in other companies.  
For example: if there are many companies producing chairs, and one of them discovers a much faster way to produce, when this commodity goes to the market, it, being sold at a similar price as the others, will yield more profit.
So, extraordinary surplus value is relative towards the industry as a whole, when some company discovers a way to lower their costs.
This surplus value tends to find an equilibrium in two ways: either when some other company also gets optimized, or when one company breaks all the others creating a monopoly.
And the point is: the final goal of every bourgeois is the increase in the extraction of surplus value. The increase. The increase.
This is not a moral judgment.
Marx at no moment makes some moral judgment.
He doesn't say "it's bad", "good", "ugly", "stupid", "melon face".
Saying that the goal of the bourgeois is the increase of surplus value is descriptive, because this is observable, we can verify it in reality.
And what is important here?
As profit is extracted by means of the surplus value, the bourgeois incorporates this profit back to their capital.
When surplus value is extracted, the bourgeois reinvests it in production to increase the extraction of this surplus value.
They finess more each time this extraction, in a endless and incessant cycle.
Capitalism has shown cyclical crisis since its beginnings.
Already in the 70's of the 19th century, Engels talks about seven crises of capitalism. Seven! In the 19th century.
This is when capitalism was way smaller than it is today; when it was restricted to only a couple of countries.
So, let's wrap it up?
Marx's critique of Political Economy focuses in analyzing capitalism.
Capitalism is a mode of production based on the employment of big industries. in the division of labour, in class society, in private property, in the commodity as the center of social relations and in the constant expansion of capital.
Let's recap some concepts. We have seen value and surplus value.
Value: it is a "property of the commodity".
And this property is "determined by the socially necessary labour.
Surplus value is the "value created by the worker which is appropriated by the bourgeois", and that doesn't return to the worker.
This surplus value can be: "absolute", when the working hours increase; "relative", when productivity increases; and "extraordinary" when the productivity in relation to other factories increases. Ok?
And why is all that important?
Weren't we going to talk about communism? Why are we talking so much about capitalism?
Understanding the capitalist mode of production is necessary so we can walk towards some other mode of production, transform our productive forces and our relations of production.
Remember we said that Marxism and Communism have an aversion towards utopianism?  towards utopia, idealism?
Every Marxist analysis, every, starts from material reality.
This is Marx's object of study: observing capitalism's reality, the reality in which he was living.
Ok? And then, we go to the last pillar of Marxism

which we call scientific socialism.

05 – Scientific Socialism


so, by now we've got a basic, and I mean really basic, analysis
of the way capitalism works, then what?
we've seen that capitalism explores and throws us in poverty.
so, what do we do with this?
very well, capitalism has developed our productive forces at a novel way .
it brought an unprecedented level of productivity, unknown to humanity by then.
however, at the same time, it thrown a huge part of humanity into misery,
A huge chunk of people was proletarianized, lost everything they had,
and turned to selling their work force for /in exchange of the bare minimum to survive
while bearing strenuous work hours.
so, how did we sharply increase productivity and poverty as the same time?
how did we enlarge machinery and automation levels and work load simultaneously?
why is it that there's more and more automation and work load never decreases?
those are the contradictions that will be our target in this next analysis.
okay, next: "Analyzing Capitalism",
we've come to the conclusion that capitalism is based in exploration, right?
this being, the first thing we can know for a fact is:
there are no exploiter without exploited, this has always been the case, right?
guys, there where always exploiters and the exploited?
Lets dig into that.
we know, also, that the mechanism of exploitation comes through private property.
Marx, through the method (dialectical and historical materialism),
come to the reasoning that there has not always been private property.
and not just that, he also found that there has been different kinds of private property throughout history .
the same goes to social classes, those weren't always in the scene,
throughout history, social classes are quite a lot different.
what can we take out of this observations of Marx?
it's that the existence of social classes and private property
it's linked to a certain phase of the development of production.
Whats so relevant about that?
Essa conclusão do Marx faz com que a gente consiga enxergar
que essas organizações sociais, essas organizações humanas, não são indispensáveis.
Private property isn't necessary for human society.
Social classes aren't imperative for human society.
So, the notion that there will always be employers and employees is false..
Não só isso; através da análise material do capitalismo,
o Marx chega à conclusão de que a gente já tem recursos para marchar em direção a outra sociedade,
com outras relações sociais.
Então, vamos lá, uma citaçãozinha aqui do Marx para a gente debater,
uma citação do Manifesto Comunista:
“Uma epidemia, que em qualquer outra época teria parecido um paradoxo,
desaba sobre a sociedade - a epidemia da superprodução.
...The conditions of bourgeois society are too narrow to comprise the wealth created by them.”
what is that Marx mean here?
By the first time in history, human society was dealing with the inverse of the it's usual problem.
until then, society had only dealt with the lack of production issue.
society had an scarcity trouble.
the capitalist mode of production brought a new problem: excess of production.
the catch is: there's only excess of production on capitalism
for the capitalist means of production are illogic, are irrational.
capitalism does not produce in order to satisfy our needs, it does to sate the needs of the capital.
If production doesn't become capital it is discarded.
That is to say/meaning, the capitalist means of production jeopardize our productive capability.
we're hindered from producing more and better due to capitalism.
So according to Marx, the capitalistic ways are obsolete. OBSOLETE.
They need to be transformed.
Is such transformation possible? Not only possible. according to Marx, it's very likely. Why?
Throughout capitalism's development, it creates its own contradictions
which will be what brings its downfall, unavoidably.
By expanding, capitalism generate proletariats
proletariat by proletariat, more ,more and more
This class that it creates, is the one which antagonizes it..
Marxism's greatest asset was to perceive that there are not only the classes,
and that those classes are unavoidably antagonistic to each other.
They'll never reach harmony, for they have contradictory interests/goals.
To this antagonism between the two main classes of capitalistic society,,
we named class struggle. Class struggle.
For Marxism, each and every doctrine, each and every set of principles
that attempts to balance classes, harmonize classes are utopic.
it's fallacious  It's a front.
If there is an exploited class, there will be a exploiter class above it/  the dominant class will always stand atop the dominated one. Every time.
The Utopians, which we talked about before, had no perspective of any class.
They sought a society which balanced all of humanity.
having perspective of the classes is knowing that they are antagonistic.
it is fundamental to what we call Scientific Socialism; which is how Engels name it.
This expression appeared to contrast with Utopic Socialism.
So, why does this matters?
According to Marx, class struggle between bourgeoisie and proletariat
will lead to a rupture with capitalism.
Whats relevant about Marx is that not only he identifies classes
he also credits revolutionary protagonist to the exploited class.
The proletariat becomes the revolution's Subject.
The proletariat belongs to the class that will conduct revolution, unlike the Utopians.
Utopians believed that the working class were unable to lead any change.
That any change would come from top-down.
Marx said otherwise: it would come bottom up

06 - Dictatorship of the proletariat


And how will this rupture be conducted?
The proletarian class, becoming aware of itself, will organize
And seize the power of state and institute something called the dictatorship of the proletariat.
What does dictatorship of the proletariat mean?
For Marx, we live in a dictatorship of the bourgeoisie.
The state does not arise as an apparatus that balances society.
You'll see idealists, to this day, saying that the State arises
to reduce society's conflicts. No.
For Marx, the state is an apparatus of violence specific of classes.
The state arises so the dominant class maintain the dominated class in it's right place,
trough violence.
In the capitalist society, who has the state apparatus is the bourgeoisie.
The state is puppeteered by the bourgeoisie to maintain the bourgeoisie on power. Alright?
So, for Marx, we live in something called the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie.
If there is capitalism, there's dictatorship of the bourgeoisie.
Well, if the state is necessarily an apparatus of violence specific of classes,
when the working class take the state, won't it still be that?
Yes, exactly. But this pyramid will get inverted.
The state is an apparatus of violence specific of classes;
with the working class taking state apparatus, 
it will use the state apparatus for, trough violence,
eradicate the bourgeoisie as class.
The state is an apparatus of violence specific of classes, and it will still being as such.
So, the State in the hands of the working class will oppress the bourgeoisie until it vanishes,
and while the other classes vanishes, the State becomes obsolete.
Once there's no more classes to oppress, the State no longer needs to exist, 
and it languishes. It disappears. It becomes useless.
That's Marx's vision of transition from socialism to communism.
That's the way the State is extinct in the Marxist point of view.
Alright? So, let's recapitulate.
"The scientific socialism: demonstrates that the existence of classes
it's connected only to certain phases of production development".
Once, they did not exist. They can cease to exist.
With the private property it's the same thing.
"The class struggle conduces, necessarily, to proletariat's dictatorship",
and "this dictatorship is nothing more than the transition to abolition of all classes,
and to an classless society."
That's Marx's great discovery.
And here, we have to make a small observation:
I've been using the terms socialism and communism,
but we need to distinguish one from another.
So, firstly: socialism and communism
only have the meaning they have today after the Russian Revolution.
Socialism is the step of transition to communism.
During socialism, the working class will be at power 
and it will oppress the bourgeoisie until the classes vanishes.
During communism, the classes no longer exist.
Marx doesn't use these terms.
Marx uses "the first stage of communist society" and "superior stage of communist society".
The reason behind it, after the Russian Revolution, the terms are switched,
it's historical, and it has the reason to be so.
It made sense at the time it came about.
But do know that, from now on, i will use "socialism" as transition
and "communism" as destiny.
Another thing: Marx doesn't determinate the specific characteristics of socialism.
Marx was a materialist. For him, any prediction or receipt was idealism.
All society should start of an material analysis. Real, ok? Not ideal.
Marx can't make the same mistake he criticized in the Utopians.
So, Marx only give the general ideas: socialism is the working class at power,
dictatorship of the proletariat and transition in direction of a society without classes.
That's why every time someone asks "how many brands of washing powder will exist in socialism?",
anything we could answer is going to be speculation. There's no way to know.
We'll know the details from experience.
And the soviets details much more what is socialism. Why?
Because they had an socialist experience! Marx didn't.
Therefore, he didn't dared to predict the future beyond what he knew it was possible.
He knew it was possible that the working class take the state apparatus;
He knew that it was possible that the working class to use the state apparatus to oppress the bourgeoisie;
He knew it was possible. And it was possible. And it was done!
All of this was made from material analysis.
Another thing: that means that, after the revolution,
at the day one of socialism, all the contradictions will go away?
Contradiction's gone. The capitalism died, any opposer died, everything died.
No. Quote of Marx:
"What we have to deal with here is a communist society, not as it has developed on its own foundations, but, on the contrary, 
just as it emerges from capitalist society;
[a communist society], which is thus in every respect, economically, morally, and intellectually, 
still stamped with the birthmarks of the old society from whose womb it emerges". 
So, just remembering:
in this quote, Marx is using the word communism as we use the word socialism today, alright?
Here, Marx is talking about the first stage of communism.
That's why i had to clarify the vocabulary here.
What's the point here? A society that come from the womb of another,
and with that it carries it's birthmarks.
If we have a capitalist, chauvinistic society and we go trough a revolution,
the new society will still be chauvinistic. This contradiction will not disappear.
The question is, the new society gives us the possibility to overcome chauvinism,
while capitalism doesn't.
The capitalism doesn't give us the opportunity of overcoming many contradictions.
ΓÇ£Oh, but what about Cuba?" "Wasn't Cuba misogynist?" "Wasn't Cuba homophobic?"
Cuba had left from an misogynist and homophobic society.
It would be strange if it wasn't at the day one of the revolution.
So, we can't generalize socialism as well,
because each socialist experience will emerge from an different capitalist experience;
with their own particularities and with their own particular contradictions. Alright? 
That was all about Marxism.
 We have: dialectical and historical materialism, political economy, scientific socialism.


07 – Partido Leninista e Guia de Leitura
(a adicionar)
